HTTP/HTTPs Service Enumeration

1. Detection via Traffic Patterns

The most obvious sign of fuzzing is a sudden spike in volume. Automated tools like ffuf, dirbusting, or Gobuster send requests much faster than a human could ever click.

    Excessive Volume: A single IP address making hundreds or thousands of requests per minute.

    The "404 Spike": In directory fuzzing, the goal is to find hidden files. Since most guesses will be wrong, your logs will show a massive amount of 404 Not Found or 403 Forbidden errors in a very short window.

2. Analyzing Logs (The "Paper Trail")

The text demonstrates how to use Linux command-line tools to parse Apache/Nginx access logs. This is often faster than opening a massive PCAP file in Wireshark.
Grep vs. Awk for Investigation

    Grep: Used to quickly find every line associated with a suspicious IP.

       bash: cat access.log | grep "192.168.10.5"

    Awk: Used for more precise filtering (e.g., only looking at the first column where the IP is stored).

    bash:  cat access.log | awk '$1 == "192.168.10.5"'

3. Wireshark Investigation Techniques

If you are analyzing the <filename>.pcapng file, specific filters to cut through the "noise" of background network traffic:
  
Filter	                  Purpose
http	                    Shows all HTTP traffic (requests and responses).
http.request	            Shows only what the attacker is asking for, hiding the server's replies.
ip.src == <IP>	          Isolates traffic coming from the suspected attacker.
Follow HTTP Stream       	Right-clicking a packet to see the full "conversation" in a readable format.
  
4. Advanced Fuzzing & Evasion

The text notes that sophisticated attackers won't just "blast" the server. They might use:

    Staggering (Rate Limiting): Sending one request every few seconds or minutes to stay under the radar of automated "rate-limiting" triggers.

    Distributed Fuzzing: Using multiple IP addresses (proxies or botnets) so that no single host looks suspicious.

    Parameter/JSON Fuzzing: Instead of looking for files, they look for logic errors, such as changing return=max to return=min to see if they can manipulate the data the server sends back.

5. Defensive Strategies

To stop or hinder these attempts, you should:

    Configure Response Codes: Sometimes, servers can be configured to return a generic error or even a 200 OK for everything to confuse scanners (though this can break other things).

    WAF Rules: Use a Web Application Firewall to automatically block IPs that trigger too many 404s in a short period.

    VirtualHost Hardening: Ensure your server doesn't leak sensitive files like .git, .bash_history, or .env if they are accidentally left in the web root
